Okay.
Can anybody hear me?
Hi.
I couldn't find the water, so today it's going to
be Coke.
So, hi.
My name is Dan Abimov.
I used to work on Blue Sky for a little bit and
on React for a little bit before that, and right now I
'm just doing random stuff.
And so, some projects you start because you have a real problem
that you want to solve.
This is not one of those projects.
So, this is one of those projects where I just had this
idea that I know React pretty well and I know how components
work, and I also kind of know Etprato at this
point, and I just had this idea, like, what if you put
components on Etprato?
And I just couldn't like kind of get rid of this
idea, and at some point I decided, okay, I just need to
try and see where that leads.
So, I vibe-coded a prototype like a couple of months
ago in one week, and it kind of looked like this.
I ended up spending the next two months completely rebuilding it properly.
But I'll just show you the prototype first, and then I
'll kind of show you how it works.
So, what you see here is, I guess, it's kind of
like a Blue Sky profile page.
So, I'm just using that as an example.
You know, it has, like, different tabs.
It has, you know, the replies tab, and the media tab, it
has pagination.
It has this critical component.
You know, there's this, like, third-party website that has this
feature that lets you see kind of social connection and, like, jump
between people and, you know, see who kind of interacted with whom
recently, which I think is a really nice, you know, kind of
thing you can do when the data is open.
But one frustration for me with a lot of apps, like, with
app paradigm in general, is that things like this have to live
somewhere else.
Like, if you, there's really no point in continuum between, you
know, if here's, like, a one-off tool that I throw
away that, like, lives on some URL somewhere that is, like, not
discoverable, and here's, like, a whole app.
And there really isn't much, like, in the middle.
And so I thought it would be interesting if there was a
way for, you know, people to kind of prototype features like this
in a place where you can find them.
And so maybe let's have a look at how this actually
works, because so far, you know, it just looks like kind of
like a worse browser.
But one interesting thing we can do is I can click Inspect
on it.
And it kind of opens up a little bit.
You can see, you know, that actually, like, what I've been
looking for is, it's kind of like a tree, kind of
like a React tree, except each of these things is actually a
Prado record somewhere.
So these are different components that could be implemented by different people,
could live in different places, and so on.
And maybe let's kind of pull it out a little bit.
So this is my profile header.
And this is profile posts.
And profile posts is probably, you know, you wouldn't be surprised
that it's a list of posts.
And a post itself, you know, it has, like, avatar and handle.
Yeah, yeah, we need to go deeper.
Yeah, so, okay, so what, you know, what, what can we do
with it?
So one thing I want to do is, I'm actually gonna,
I'm gonna open this as a different user.
So I have, like, another browser here.
Let's, let's take this profile header.
So I'm now logged in, not as the never move, but
like, as another user.
And I have this remix button here.
So I'm gonna press remix.
And I hope that it works.
And so this opens up sort of an editor.
So this is the profile header.
And you can see there's a bunch of something that looks
like JSX here, but, you know, really is JSON.
That's what JSX has always been.
And I can actually look at, like, another way to look at
it is just on ptsls.
So I'm gonna open ptsls.
And I have this inlay component collection.
And I have this profile header.
And so this stuff that you see here, like, there's, like,
a stack with, like, avatar, and, like, title, and caption, and, like,
all of that jazz.
And, like, the cover is actually, like, you can also see here
that this is this JSON structure, which is just, like, a UI
tree.
And it imports from some dits, which are, this is, like,
the built-ins.
This is the design system.
And these are actually, like, my other components.
So it's kind of like dits act kind of like
packages.
And here it says that this component can act as a kind
of a view of the profile collection.
So it's like a thing that can render a profile, at
least one of those things.
And so I'm gonna remix this a little bit.
I'll, I think I'll get rid of the cover.
And actually, like, maybe, you know, maybe I'll get rid of
the avatar, too.
And instead, I'll add a, I'll add a Skir
cle component.
So you've seen the Skircle before.
So I'll just, I'll just throw that in here so
that it's, it's easy to find.
I think I'll actually, let me put it here.
And I'll make this a row instead of, yeah, and maybe,
maybe I'll add some inset.
Okay, so this is, like, my take on what a profile header
should be.
So there's already a profile header component.
But I'm gonna publish another profile header component from kind of
my perspective, from this user's perspective.
And so this, you know, this doesn't change, like, what we
're looking at here.
But actually, like, again, you know, I can switch between them.
So here's, here's the new profile header component from, you
know, my other user.
And, you know, you can see there are, like, all these different
ways to look at the profile, right?
Like, what, what makes a profile a profile, even like something like,
like, like, like BDSLS shows it.
And so, okay, so I made this profile header, but this profile
component written by somebody else, it doesn't use that header, right?
But what I can do is, again, I can click remix here.
And so now we're gonna, wait, is it, is it going
to the wrong thing?
I think it's going, let me just refresh just in case.
Yeah, it went to the wrong thing.
But here's the, so here's the, the profile component itself
that contains, you can see it has the profile header, it has
the tabs with like posts and replies, and kind of, you know,
delegates to those.
It has the Skircle tab.
I'm not going to need that because I move, I've
moved the Skircle, you know, into, and I guess Paul
doesn't listen to music, so it doesn't have till FM
plays.
I'll just get rid of that too, actually, for now.
Yeah, and so, but now we have two versions of the profile
header, right?
There's one by Dan Abramov, which is the original
one, it's here.
And then there's profile header by my user, which is just
created.
And so what I'm going to do is I'm going
to slide this a little bit up so that it takes preced
ence.
So now the profile header is going to refer to the version
that, you know, that I remixed from my user.
So this is kind of like a low stakes way to like
play around with, okay, this is what I think a profile page
should be.
So I'm just going to, you know, I'm just going
to publish this as profile.
And again, the, you know, it's, it's, it's just
an option here.
So now you can see that this is, this is my take,
you know, my user's take on what a profile page could
be.
Okay, so, of course, we don't want to always create everything
from scratch unless you're using LLMs.
I, this project is like a very caveman mode.
I'm sure there's like a way to get LL
M to do this as well.
And I don't know if it makes sense.
But I'm just I'm just showing you kind of the
vanilla version.
And so Canvas, you know, this thing, I'm calling it like
a Canvas, right?
It's just like this, this thing where you can kind of
jump around and kind of see different things and pull them apart.
But one problem, that's my first prototype.
But I realized that, okay, like, how do you actually discover these
components that other people create?
And that's, you know, I made the editor, but then the
question was, where do you find them?
So I realized I needed something like a browser, too.
That's kind of like, I guess, kind of like PDS
LS, right?
So we, we could say, you know, if you've ever, if
you've ever seen PDSLS, you know, this interface where,
like, you select the, you select the user, and then you select
the collection type.
And you can just like navigate between records, right?
So this is kind of PDSLS inspired.
But maybe you can like register this, like other ways to view
the same data, right, that are like more human friendly.
And I'll just show you like the process for what, you
know, what it feels like to create one of those.
So I'll say I'll go to profile.
And again, like just a profile record, like looks like this, this
is a built in component, I'm gonna create a new one,
gives me this template with like, stuff that's available.
And I'm just gonna say, okay, like, let's say I
want, I want an avatar.
And it knows that, oh, like, there's already a did here,
so it refills it.
And I want like a, you know, I want like a title
with, let's say, like, Paul's, like, display name, right?
So we put display name here, and let's make this like
a, oops, oops, oops, a row.
Okay, so I'm gonna publish this as like profile example.
Okay, so here's my profile.
Where is it in the list?
I don't see it in the list.
Oh, there it is.
So here's my profile example component.
Let's check that it appears in my other users, bts
ls.
So there it is, profile example, you can see the tree and
stuff.
So there are three types of inlay components.
So this kind of component is called a template component because the,
the actual JSON for how to, for the UI lives directly inside
the record.
So, you know, if inlay dies, you can, you know, you
can just interpret the same data and kind of bring it back
to life.
But it's very limited, right?
Because I can't have, this is not JavaScript, this is just
like a JSX editor.
It's just like, it could be, it could have been like
a block editor or whatever.
But it doesn't have like loops, it doesn't have conditions,
it doesn't have like any fancy, I can't, you can
't like hit another app view, another service or whatever.
So it's a bit limited.
But the one thing we can do is we can eject.
I really like this feature.
I build it into everything.
Okay, wait, I can't eject from this one because I haven
't, I haven't created a token.
Let me use, let me just do the same example from my
user where I already connected.
So there's, there's this thing called valtown.
I don't know if you, let me delete this.
Call this profile example.
Yeah.
So there's a, there's this thing called valtown, which
is like a kind of simple coding environment for publishing some server
code, kind of like REPL for, you know, that lets you
like run a server.
So when you press eject on a component, what it's going
to do is it's going to hit the valtown API,
which is for some reason taking like five seconds and generate what
they call eval.
So eval is just, you know, it's just a server.
And I, I made some helpers for this thing.
And like these are lexicons.
So it, it like gets type checked.
But this is, you know, this is my component.
Like I just, I just moved it from here.
Now I can like call it.
So it's an xrpc call to that component,
which means that I can, you know, I can treat it as
code.
I could make like a different, you know, API calls here or
whatever.
And let's see.
Yeah, you see it, it, it updated.
So it works.
All right.
Now I need to drink.
So let's, uh, let's build another fun little component.
Um, so let's go to this, uh, what is it?
Uh, no, the, the UNME connection thing that everybody's been
using at the conference.
Uh, well, spoiler, I already, I already made it.
Uh, well, let me, let me just delete it.
So, so I can demo it again.
Uh, where is the, why can't I delete it actually?
Is it from a different?
Oh, I made it from a different account.
Wait one second.
I'll delete it.
Don't close your eyes.
Uh, so that you haven't seen it.
And then I'll just make it again.
Okay.
It's gone.
Uh, so we're, we're going to make a little component,
you know, like when you look at PGSLS version of
this, like connections, it's like, what is going on here?
Subject did and, and, and so on.
So, uh, let's see, we're going to create a little,
a little component that I'm going to take the did of
myself, uh, you know, from the record and let's, let's
show, uh, maybe like a, like an avi handle.
Maybe it's not a bad idea.
And then let's take the did of the subject and maybe
also show an avi handle and maybe let's like just,
just do some emoji, like high five.
And yeah, so, and we're, and let's say we, we
still add a timestamp.
Okay.
So we're going to publish this as a connection.
So now you can see, you know, you can see what's
been going on.
Uh, yeah.
Uh, let's see.
Let's see who I said hi to.
Yeah.
Okay.
So this is working.
Um, let's go back to the, uh, let's go back
to the profile.
So I kind of have this, this playground where I can, you
know, kind of just play with different components, kind of riff on
them.
Um, it's, it is a bit tedious sometimes.
Like if I want to, like maybe I just want to change
something globally, right?
Like in NPM, like the model so far I'm following
is similar to NPM, but like each component has dependencies.
And so like, if you want to change something, you fork that
component, and then you kind of have to fork upwards dependency chain.
Uh, but for example, in NPM, there's this feature, uh,
like, uh, resolutions at the top where you can just say, you
know, for everything, like I actually want to globally make something different.
So for example, like, let's say, uh, you know, like yesterday,
Paul was showing this example with, uh, removing, uh, the handles and
just showing, uh, the, uh, display names, uh, way ahead of you.
Uh, well, the truth is I actually haven't built a handle
component.
So I just, I literally can't make the handle work.
Uh, but I have a different idea.
So I, I kind of want to remix this AV handle thing.
And specifically, um, you know, I, I want to, uh, democrat, democrat
ize, uh, education.
So I want to make us all PhDs.
So I'm just going to put PhD here, uh, and I
'm going to publish that.
But now the problem is, okay, you know, like you want things
to be predictable.
So you don't really want like everything to just fall apart
because like you change one little thing.
So you kind of want to be like intentional, uh, about like,
do you want to like override something?
And so I'm not going to like fork all the way
to the top.
Instead, I'm going to use something slightly different.
So I have this like stack feature here, which is, uh, kind
of like a global resolution mechanism, which has like first, you know,
you go through whatever the component author specifies, and then you
can fall back on like my versions of components if some I
'm missing.
But I can actually drag that up and say, whoa, wait, I,
okay, that was, that was not intentional.
Uh, but we can pretend that this didn't happen.
So, uh, you can, you know, you can say that I want
to prefer, uh, this version, uh, that, that I, you know, of
any component.
And so when I, when I drag this thing above, it means
that it will prefer my versions of a component throughout the whole
tree.
So this is why, uh, everyone is a PhD now.
Great.
Um, okay.
We're, we're gonna run out of time soon.
I just want to, um, I want to see why this broke,
because I kind of wanted to show this.
So, uh, connection, a result type connection.
Uh, so is it called, did I not save it?
Oh, it has a different NSID.
I created it.
Yeah.
I created it from a different user.
Uh, okay.
I'll just, I'll just, I'll just publish it from,
from, uh, yeah, I did not anticipate this.
Uh, one second, let me delete this.
And, uh, this is published by, it's not easy to, to
be two different users at the same time.
Let me just delete this as if it didn't exist.
And I'm gonna, I'm just gonna create this again from
my real user, because that's, that's what I'm already
hardcoding somewhere else.
So this is my connection component.
Okay, cool.
And the, uh, yeah.
So the other thing I wanted to show here is, um, so
feeds, right?
Uh, like in feeds, uh, we, like feeds are another area where
there's like, uh, some providers of, uh, like the actual, like
feed content, but the format of the feed itself is determined by
the app.
And you can't really experiment with like what goes into a
feed, uh, if you're not an art, an app author.
So something, uh, something I wanted to show here is that, uh,
actually like, if you look at the post list component, uh, where
I'm, that is responsible for showing, you know, this list of
posts, if you look at its source, um, which is here, like
profile posts, for example.
So if you look at its source, uh, the way it works
is that it hits, uh, some did, uh, with, uh, with a
query, right?
So I'm calling this like get, uh, profile posts page.
And I have this, uh, you know, in my Val town, I
have, uh, uh, like I have a service run in that is,
uh, uh, wait, then this is not the one, this one.
So, so this is, this is the thing that gives, that generates
the profile page, uh, the profile posts.
And you can see that it hits the Busk API and
then it just returns UI components, right?
So this is how, this is how we see, uh, you know,
like this stuff is coming from here.
And similarly, the, uh, the media tab where we see a grid
of those images, like it's, it's not like hard coded.
It's also like, it's just a component hidden, a list
of get profile media page.
And here it's like a bunch of blobs that are
getting clipped, uh, as, as squares.
Or like get TLFM plays, uh, on, well, again, uh,
Paul doesn't listen to music, but, uh, if you go to
my profile, uh, yeah, you can, it's like everything is a
little browser.
Uh, yeah, if you go to my profile and look at plays,
you see like it's, this is, this is TLFM
plays.
And it just, uh, you know, this is how it works.
It just fetches the collection and renders a TL, an
array of TL play components.
Uh, but, you know, what if you want to experiment with the
content of those feeds themselves?
And so, uh, actually each of these, you know, like I provide
these endpoints here, uh, but these are also dynamically bound.
So the way it actually works is that in my pgs
ls, uh, there's a, uh, there's an endpoint collection that
says to get, uh, you know, get profile posts page, uh, gets
resolved to a service running here, which is, you know, this code.
And so this is how it renders an array of posts.
Uh, but what my other user does, uh, so my other user,
uh, has, uh, also has an endpoint record for the same endpoint,
and it says actually let's hit this other, you know, let
's hit this other service.
And this other service is, uh, here it is.
So this is a different implementation of the get profile posts page.
And here it fetches the posts, but it also fetches
the UNME connections.
And, you know, and the element is just like a connection, the
connection, uh, component that I created earlier.
And it kind of just interleaves them.
And so this is, uh, this is when, you know, when I
prioritize, uh, sorry, in here, when I prioritize, uh, my other stuff
in the stack, then this is why it's gonna just, yeah,
like, it's just gonna show them inline.
So this is something that you can also experiment with.
Um, yeah.
And, you know, this is, this is, uh, this is just a
prototype.
Like, I, I don't know if it's, I, I may
like, I've coded like a Swift 2i client for it.
So the, uh, I said there are three, uh, three types of
components.
There's template components that are the UI lives in the record.
Uh, there's external components, which are, you know, the ones that,
uh, are ejected, which hit like a service or like, uh,
like a valve or your own server or whatever.
And the third type is built in.
And so the, you know, when you looked at the, um, you
can see this, this, uh, the red ones are overwritten.
Uh, from the stack.
Uh, so it's like, I want to do something different here.
So, um, you can see that here, like these are, these are
the built ins.
So they don't have any implementation on the, on the protocol.
This is something that like the design system implements.
And I, you know, I have my own design system that is,
uh, there's like what I'm using here, all this like
row, caption, avatar, all the stuff you've seen.
But in principle, you could make, you know, you could fork my,
I just open sourced, uh, inlay.
So it's, uh, it's untangled.
Uh, uh, or is it a tangled, uh, inlay?
Yeah, there it is.
Um, so the app is also open source.
Uh, so, you know, you can fork it, you can make your
own version.
You can decide to have a different set of primitives.
Uh, and, uh, to, uh, like I, I made these primitives
to be like cross platforms.
So you could make like a Swift UI client for them or
something else, but you could make them like closer to HTML if
you want.
And yeah, this is just an idea I'm kind of throwing
out.
Like, I'm probably not gonna like maintain this forever.
Uh, but it's on the protocol.
So in some sense, it is maintained forever.
So thank you.
Oh, I forgot.
Uh, yeah, it's, it's, it's called inlay.
It's like inlay.
at.
Yeah, this is, this is, this is how you find it.
Okay, sorry.
Bye.